.\" SPDX-License-Identifier: GPL-2.0-or-later
.TH BDFS 1 "2025" "bdfs 1.0.0" "BTRFS+DwarFS Framework"
.SH NAME
bdfs \- BTRFS+DwarFS hybrid filesystem management tool
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B bdfs
[\fIGLOBAL OPTIONS\fR]
.I COMMAND
[\fICOMMAND OPTIONS\fR]
[\fIARGS\fR...]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B bdfs
manages the BTRFS+DwarFS hybrid filesystem framework.
It registers partitions, drives export/import pipelines between BTRFS
subvolumes and DwarFS images, manages FUSE mounts, and controls the
unified blend namespace.
.PP
All operations that modify kernel state require the
.B bdfs_daemon
to be running and the
.B btrfs_dwarfs
kernel module to be loaded.
.SH GLOBAL OPTIONS
.TP
.BR \-v ", " \-\-verbose
Verbose output.
.TP
.BR \-j ", " \-\-json
JSON output. All commands emit machine-readable JSON when this flag is set.
.TP
.BR \-C ", " \-\-no\-color
Disable ANSI colour codes.
.TP
.BI \-c " device" ", " \-\-ctl " device"
Control device path. Default:
.IR /dev/bdfs_ctl .
.TP
.BI \-s " path" ", " \-\-socket " path"
Daemon Unix socket path. Default:
.IR /run/bdfs/daemon.sock .
.TP
.BR \-h ", " \-\-help
Show help and exit.
.TP
.BR \-V ", " \-\-version
Show version and exit.
.SH COMMANDS
.SS Partition Management
.TP
.B bdfs partition add \-\-type \fITYPE\fR \-\-device \fIPATH\fR \-\-label \fILABEL\fR [\-\-mount \fIMOUNTPOINT\fR]
Register a partition with the framework.
.I TYPE
is one of:
.RS
.TP
.B dwarfs\-backed
The partition stores BTRFS subvolumes/snapshots as DwarFS image files.
.TP
.B btrfs\-backed
The partition is a live BTRFS filesystem that stores DwarFS image files.
.TP
.B hybrid\-blend
Both layers active; presents a unified namespace.
.RE
.TP
.B bdfs partition remove \fIUUID\fR
Unregister a partition.
.TP
.B bdfs partition list
List all registered partitions.
.TP
.B bdfs partition show \fIUUID\fR
Show full details for a partition, including all images or subvolumes.
.SS Data Movement
.TP
.B bdfs export \-\-partition \fIUUID\fR \-\-subvol\-id \fIID\fR \-\-btrfs\-mount \fIPATH\fR \-\-name \fINAME\fR [\fIOPTIONS\fR]
Export a BTRFS subvolume or snapshot to a DwarFS image stored on a
DwarFS-backed partition.
.RS
.TP
.BI \-\-compression " ALGO"
Compression algorithm:
.BR zstd " (default), " lzma ", " lz4 ", " brotli ", " none .
.TP
.BI \-\-block\-size\-bits " N"
DwarFS block size as log2. Default: 22 (4 MiB blocks).
.TP
.BI \-\-workers " N"
Number of mkdwarfs worker threads. Default: 4.
.TP
.B \-\-incremental
Incremental export from parent snapshot.
.TP
.B \-\-verify
Run
.BR dwarfsck (1)
on the image after creation.
.RE
.TP
.B bdfs import \-\-partition \fIUUID\fR \-\-image\-id \fIID\fR \-\-btrfs\-mount \fIPATH\fR \-\-subvol\-name \fINAME\fR [\fIOPTIONS\fR]
Import a DwarFS image into a new BTRFS subvolume.
.RS
.TP
.B \-\-readonly
Make the resulting subvolume read-only.
.TP
.B \-\-snapshot
Create as a snapshot rather than a plain subvolume.
.RE
.SS Mount Management
.TP
.B bdfs mount \-\-partition \fIUUID\fR \-\-image\-id \fIID\fR \-\-mountpoint \fIPATH\fR [\-\-cache\-mb \fIN\fR]
Mount a DwarFS image via the FUSE driver.
.TP
.B bdfs umount \-\-partition \fIUUID\fR \-\-image\-id \fIID\fR [\-\-force]
Unmount a DwarFS image.
.TP
.B bdfs blend mount \-\-btrfs\-uuid \fIUUID\fR \-\-dwarfs\-uuid \fIUUID\fR \-\-mountpoint \fIPATH\fR [\fIOPTIONS\fR]
Mount the unified BTRFS+DwarFS blend namespace.
Reads are served from the BTRFS upper layer first, falling through to the
DwarFS lower layer. Writes always go to the BTRFS upper layer.
.TP
.B bdfs blend umount \-\-mountpoint \fIPATH\fR [\-\-force] [\-\-lazy]
Unmount the blend namespace.
.SS Snapshot and Archive
.TP
.B bdfs snapshot \-\-partition \fIUUID\fR \-\-image\-id \fIID\fR \-\-name \fINAME\fR [\-\-readonly]
Create a BTRFS snapshot of the subvolume containing a DwarFS image.
The snapshot captures the image file at its current state via BTRFS CoW,
so future re-exports do not affect the snapshot.
.TP
.B bdfs promote \-\-blend\-path \fIPATH\fR \-\-subvol\-name \fINAME\fR
Promote a DwarFS-backed path in the blend namespace to a writable BTRFS
subvolume. The DwarFS lower layer remains until explicitly removed.
.TP
.B bdfs demote \-\-blend\-path \fIPATH\fR \-\-image\-name \fINAME\fR [\-\-compression \fIALGO\fR] [\-\-delete\-subvol]
Compress a BTRFS subvolume to a DwarFS image.
With
.B \-\-delete\-subvol
the BTRFS subvolume is removed after successful image creation, completing
the tier-down and reclaiming BTRFS space.
.SS Status
.TP
.B bdfs status [\-\-partition \fIUUID\fR]
Show framework status: registered partitions, image/subvolume counts,
and daemon health. With
.B \-\-partition
shows full details for that partition.
.SH EXAMPLES
.SS Register a DwarFS-backed partition
.nf
bdfs partition add \\
    \-\-type dwarfs\-backed \\
    \-\-device /dev/sdb1 \\
    \-\-label archive \\
    \-\-mount /mnt/archive
.fi
.SS Export a BTRFS subvolume to DwarFS
.nf
# Get the subvolume ID
btrfs subvolume list /mnt/data

# Export it
bdfs export \\
    \-\-partition 12345678\-1234\-1234\-1234\-123456789abc \\
    \-\-subvol\-id 256 \\
    \-\-btrfs\-mount /mnt/data \\
    \-\-name myapp_v1 \\
    \-\-compression zstd \\
    \-\-verify
.fi
.SS Mount a DwarFS image
.nf
bdfs mount \\
    \-\-partition 12345678\-1234\-1234\-1234\-123456789abc \\
    \-\-image\-id 1 \\
    \-\-mountpoint /mnt/myapp_v1 \\
    \-\-cache\-mb 512
.fi
.SS Demote live data to archive
.nf
# Compress the subvolume and remove it from BTRFS
bdfs demote \\
    \-\-blend\-path /mnt/blend/myapp \\
    \-\-image\-name myapp_archived \\
    \-\-compression zstd \\
    \-\-delete\-subvol
.fi
.SS Promote archived data back to writable
.nf
bdfs promote \\
    \-\-blend\-path /mnt/blend/myapp_archived \\
    \-\-subvol\-name myapp_live
.fi
.SH FILES
.TP
.I /dev/bdfs_ctl
Kernel module control device.
.TP
.I /run/bdfs/daemon.sock
Daemon Unix domain socket.
.TP
.I /var/lib/bdfs/
Daemon state directory.
.TP
.I /etc/bdfs/bdfs.conf
Framework configuration file.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR bdfs_daemon (8),
.BR btrfs (8),
.BR mkdwarfs (1),
.BR dwarfs (1),
.BR dwarfsextract (1),
.BR dwarfsck (1)
.SH AUTHORS
BTRFS+DwarFS Framework Contributors.
Based on
.B btrfs\-devel
by kdave and
.B DwarFS
by Marcus Holland-Moritz.
